Add weak-ref design notes .md (#1961)
microsoft/ebpf-for-windows: docs/eBPFWeakReferences.md

**Introduction and problem statement**

The eBPF user-kernel interface is built around a few key objects such as 'Programs', 'Maps' and their interaction. The
'eBPF for Windows' implementation makes extensive use of 'reference counting' to manage the interactions and lifetimes
of these objects.  Code paths 'acquire' references to the required objects for the needed duration and 'release' them

> when done.  The reference counting design ensures that the referred-to objects remain valid (i.e. are not deleted) for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
when done.  The reference counting design ensures that the referred-to objects remain valid (i.e., are not deleted) for
```
non-blocking nit: per Chicago Manual of Style, "i.e." and "e.g." should always have a comma after them, like other places in this file do.

Author: fixed

duration of their strong references.  While this property is mandatory in most use cases, it can lead to
'circular reference' instances.  Such instances are perfectly valid and the relationship between a 'Program Array Map'
and an eBPF 'program' is an example of such a relationship.  This circular reference ensures that both the
'Program Array Map' and the eBPF 'program' remain valid for the duration of each other's existence, as they should be.

The user mode application that uses these objects can easily tear down such instances when done, by calling the
provided clean-up API.  The problem arises when the user mode application does not (careless implementation) or is
unable (application crash or a premature exit) to perform this explicit clean-up.

In such cases, the 'Program Array Map' and the 'Program' objects persist even after the user mode application's exit as
the strong circular references make clean-up extremely complex and fragile.  Furthermore, complex edge cases such as
multiple references to the same object from another object (the same program being stored at multiple locations in the

> same Prog Array map) leads to complex implementations to ensure proper clean-up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
same Prog Array map) lead to complex implementations to ensure proper clean-up.
```
grammar nit

**Introduction and problem statement**

> The eBPF user-kernel interface is built around a few key objects such as 'Programs', 'Maps' and their interaction. The 'eBPF for Windows' implementation makes extensive use of 'reference counting' to manage the interactions and lifetimes of these objects.  Code paths 'acquire' references to the required objects for the needed duration and 'release' them when done.  The reference counting design ensures that the referred-to objects remain valid (i.e. are not deleted) for the duration of the reference acquisition.

Reviewer: https://github.com/microsoft/ebpf-for-windows/blob/main/docs/DevelopmentGuide.md#formatting-notes says
> Source lines MUST NOT exceed 120 columns.

(One rationale is that github has problems showing later diffs in long lines)

Author: I'd assumed that was _code_ files only.  But now that you mention the GH problem, I can see why it's applicable to non-code files such as this one.  I'll fix this

Author: fixed

> By default, these references are of the 'strong' type, i.e. the referred-to objects are guaranteed to be valid for the duration of it's associated references.  While this property is mandatory in most use cases, it can lead to 'circular reference' instances.  Such instances are perfectly valid and the relationship between a 'Program Array Map' and a eBPF 'program' is an example of such a relationship.  This circular reference ensures that both the 'Program Array Map' remain valid for the duration of each other's existence, as they should be.

Reviewer 2: <<< This circular reference ensures that both the 'Program Array Map' remain valid for the duration of each other's existence, as they should be.
>>> This circular reference ensures that both the 'Program Array Map' and the eBPF 'program' remain valid for the duration of each other's existence, as they should be.

Author: fixed

> By default, these references are of the 'strong' type, i.e. the referred-to objects are guaranteed to be valid for the duration of their strong references.  While this property is mandatory in most use cases, it can lead to 'circular reference' instances.  Such instances are perfectly valid and the relationship between a 'Program Array Map' and a eBPF 'program' is an example of such a relationship.  This circular reference ensures that both the 'Program Array Map' and the eBPF 'program' remain valid for the duration of each other's existence, as they should be.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, these references are of the 'strong' type, i.e., the referred-to objects are guaranteed to be valid for the duration of their strong references.  While this property is mandatory in most use cases, it can lead to 'circular reference' instances.  Such instances are perfectly valid and the relationship between a 'Program Array Map' and an eBPF 'program' is an example of such a relationship.  This circular reference ensures that both the 'Program Array Map' and the eBPF 'program' remain valid for the duration of each other's existence, as they should be.
```
I'm not sure if there's a legitimate case for a circular reference existing. (That doesn't mean the design described isn't a good one though.)  I think the real issue this design addresses is that it's tricky in general to prevent circular references given there can be a long chain of map1->prog1->map2->prog2->...->mapN->progN->map1 for example.

Author: While we don't _have_ circular reference instances currently, the intent was to solve the 'circular reference' problem in a _generic_ manner, be it direct (as shown by the simple example in this document) or the eminently possible chain that you'd illustrated.

The user mode application that uses these objects can easily tear down such instances when done, by calling the provided clean-up API.  The problem arises when the user mode application does not (careless implementation) or is unable (application crash or a premature exit) to perform this explicit clean-up.

> In such cases, the 'Program Array Map' and the 'Program' objects persist even after the user mode application's exit as the strong circular references make clean-up extremely complex and fragile.  Furthermore, complex edge cases such as multiple references to the same object from another object (The same program being stored at multiple locations in the same Prog Array map) leads to complex implementations to ensure proper clean-up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In such cases, the 'Program Array Map' and the 'Program' objects persist even after the user mode application's exit as the strong circular references make clean-up extremely complex and fragile.  Furthermore, complex edge cases such as multiple references to the same object from another object (the same program being stored at multiple locations in the same Prog Array map) leads to complex implementations to ensure proper clean-up.
```

Author: fixed

**Proposed solution**

> To correctly handle such edge cases and provide consistent and deterministic clean-up, this proposal introduces the concept of 'Weak Reference' objects.  A 'Weak Reference' ('weak-ref') object is an intermediate 'secondary' object that provides the ability to refer to the final 'primary' objects such as Programs and Maps. A weak-ref object exibits the following characteristics:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To correctly handle such edge cases and provide consistent and deterministic clean-up, this proposal introduces the concept of 'Weak Reference' objects.  A 'Weak Reference' ('weak-ref') object is an intermediate 'secondary' object that provides the ability to refer to the final 'primary' objects such as Programs and Maps. A weak-ref object exhibits the following characteristics:
```

Author: fixed

1. A weak-ref object instance is dynamically created during the creation of every primary object instance.
2. A weak-ref object is always associated with one and only one primary object instance.  This association is set up during the primary object's creation.

> 3. A weak-ref object can be disassociated from the primary object it refers to.  This disassociation happens when the primary object is being destroyed, i.e. when the primary object's ref-count goes to zero. Note that the primary object's destruction does not affect the weak-ref's ref-count in any manner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. A weak-ref object can be disassociated from the primary object it refers to.  This disassociation happens when the primary object is being destroyed, i.e., when the primary object's ref-count goes to zero. Note that the primary object's destruction does not affect the weak-ref's ref-count in any manner.
```

Author: fixed

> 4. Once dis-associated, a weak-ref object cannot be made to refer to it's previously referred to or another object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Once dis-associated, a weak-ref object cannot be made to refer to its previously referred to or another object.
```

Author: fixed

> 5. The life time of a weak-ref object is independent of the referred-to primary object and will always be greater than that of the referred-to object. To this end, the weak-ref object maintains it's own reference count, completely separate from that of the referred-to object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. The life time of a weak-ref object is independent of the referred-to primary object and will always be greater than that of the referred-to object. To this end, the weak-ref object maintains its own reference count, completely separate from that of the referred-to object.
```

Author: fixed

> The ref-count manipulation for both, the weak-ref and the referred-to objects can be seen in the table below for the applicable events:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ref-count manipulation for both the weak-ref and the referred-to objects can be seen in the table below for the applicable events:
```

Author: fixed

|                                    |                   |                         |
| try-acquire referred-to            | unchanged         | increment, iff non-zero |
|   obj via weak-ref                 |                   |                         |
|                                    |                   |                         |
| release referred-to obj ref        | unchanged         | decrement               |
|   (decrements<br>ref count of      |                   |                         |
|   referred-to obj)                 |                   |                         |
|                                    |                   |                         |
| weak-ref acquire ref               | increment         | unchanged               |
|                                    |                   |                         |
| weak-ref release ref               | decrement         | unchanged               |
|                                    |                   |                         |
| Referred-to obj<br>destruction     | decrement         | decrement               |
|                                    |                   |                         |

> | Weak-ref obj<br>destruction        | decrement         | decrement               |

Reviewer 2: Incorrect. Weak ref is by definition in the disassociated state when it is destroyed, so it can not possibly influence the referred to object.

Author: silly typo on my part. fixed

|                                    |                   |                         |
```

**Weak-ref management API:**

> The weak-ref implementation extends the base "ebpf object" management layer and is thus available for all primary object types.  The weak-ref management API are prototyped in the ```epbf_object.h``` header and provides the following calls:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The weak-ref implementation extends the base "ebpf object" management layer and is thus available for all primary object types.  The weak-ref management API prototypes are in the ```epbf_object.h``` header which provides the following calls:
```

Author: fixed

```ebpf_weak_reference_t* ebpf_object_weak_reference_get_reference(ebpf_core_object_t* object);```
<br>

> The caller typically begins by calling this API to get a weak-ref pointer to the primary object they are interested in. This call increments the ref count for the weak-ref but does not modify the primary object's ref-count.  The caller now has a 'token' that they can now use to (conditionally) get the primary object pointer, either right away or at some later point in time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The caller typically begins by calling this API to get a weak-ref pointer to the primary object it is interested in. This call increments the ref count for the weak-ref but does not modify the primary object's ref-count.  The caller now has a 'token' that it can now use to (conditionally) get the primary object pointer, either right away or at some later point in time.
```

Author: fixed

<br><br>

```ebpf_core_object_t* ebpf_object_weak_reference_get_object_reference(ebpf_weak_reference_t* weak_reference);```
<br>

> The caller uses this call to try and get the primary object pointer.  The 'try' is deliberate in that this call is not guaranteed to return a valid pointer to the referred-to object as the referred-to object might have been destroyed (or is in the process of being destroyed).  In such cases, this call will return a NULL.  If the object is still around, this call increments the ref-count of the referred-to object and returns a valid object pointer to the caller. The ref-count of the weak-ref object is not modified in this entire process. In case of a valid pointer return, the caller is responsible for releasing the reference on the returned object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The caller uses this call to try to get the primary object pointer.  The 'try' is deliberate in that this call is not guaranteed to return a valid pointer to the referred-to object as the referred-to object might have been destroyed (or be in the process of being destroyed).  In such cases, this call will return a NULL.  If the object is still around, this call increments the ref-count of the referred-to object and returns a valid object pointer to the caller. The ref-count of the weak-ref object is not modified in this entire process. In case of a valid pointer return, the caller is responsible for releasing the reference on the returned object.
```

Author: fixed

<br><br>

```void ebpf_object_weak_reference_acquire_reference(ebpf_weak_reference_t* weak_reference);```
<br>
The caller uses this call to increment the ref-count of the weak-ref object, to ensure the weak-ref's validity and/or longevity in multiple reference scenarios.
<br><br>

```void ebpf_object_weak_reference_release_reference(ebpf_weak_reference_t* weak_reference);```
<br>

> The caller uses this call to decrement the ref-count of the weak-ref object, when the weak-ref object is no longer needed. When the ref-count of the weak-ref goes to zero, it is destroyed.  Note that the weak-ref starts life with a ref-count of 1 when it is created and associated with the referred-to object (in the context of it's referred-to object's creation) and hence is guaranteed to stay alive until after the primary object is destroyed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The caller uses this call to decrement the ref-count of the weak-ref object, when the weak-ref object is no longer needed. When the ref-count of the weak-ref goes to zero, it is destroyed.  Note that the weak-ref starts life with a ref-count of 1 when it is created and associated with the referred-to object (in the context of its referred-to object's creation) and hence is guaranteed to stay alive until after the primary object is destroyed.
```

Author: fixed

**Conclusion.**

> The weak-ref design provides a simple and maintainable solution to the circular reference problem.  With this approach, the object maps (Prog-Array, Array-Map-of-Maps, Hash-Map-of-Maps) do not need to take a strong reference on the contained objects anymore.  Instead, they now acquire their weak-ref equivalents and store them along side their stored object ids (the per-entry storage space has been suitably expanded to accomodate the weak-ref pointer). When needed, they can now try to get pointers to the referred-to primary objects with the explicit understanding that they might not succeed in doing so.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The weak-ref design provides a simple and maintainable solution to the circular reference problem.  With this approach, the object maps (Prog-Array, Array-Map-of-Maps, Hash-Map-of-Maps) do not need to take a strong reference on the contained objects anymore.  Instead, they now acquire their weak-ref equivalents and store them alongside their stored object ids (the per-entry storage space has been suitably expanded to accommodate the weak-ref pointer). When needed, they can now try to get pointers to the referred-to primary objects with the explicit understanding that they might not succeed in doing so.
```

The question I would ask is if this design would require a map or program to need pinning on Windows where it would not need pinning on Linux due to a strong reference being taken.  If not, great, but if so then that would harm cross-platform programs.

Author: Investigating
